# A note on naming conventions

When preparing the new genome portal, modifications were made to the naming conventions used for genome contigs/scaffolds and gene/transcript models. Because these changes were done after all analyses for the manuscript had already been completed, the code in this repository is based around a different naming convention than the one used for the genome portal. **To interconvert between the *H. vulgaris* gene/transcript IDs used in the manuscript and the IDs used for the genome portal, please refer to the file `HVAEP.master.conversion.table.csv` in this directory.** An explanation of the various naming conventions is provided below.

The scaffold naming convention used for the *H. vulgaris*, strain AEP genome assembly and annotation process uses the prefix 'chr-' (for chromosome) followed by a number. For example, chr-1 refers to the scaffold 'chromosome 1'. Gene models were named using the format HVAEP1_G######, with 'HVAEP1' indicating the genome version (i.e., *H. vulgaris*, strain AEP, version 1), 'G' indicating that the identifier refers to a gene, and '######' being a unique padded numeric ID for a particular gene model. For example, the gene name for *wnt3* is HVAEP1_G010730. Genes are named according to their order in the genome, such that HVAEP1_G010729 is the gene immediately upstream of HVAEP1_G010730 and HVAEP1_G010731 is the the gene immediately downstream of HVAEP1_G010730. The transcript naming convention uses the format HVAEP1_T######.#, with 'HVAEP1' again indicating the genome version, 'T' indicating that the identifier refers to a transcript, '######' being the same unique numeric ID as the parent gene, and '.#' indicating the transcript isoform number. For example, the first isoform for *wnt3* in the AEP gene models is HVAEP1_T010730.1. 

On the genome portal, the AEP scaffold prefix was modified from 'chr-' to 'HVAEP', such that the scaffold chr-1 became HVAEP1. For the AEP gene and transcript models, the 'HVAEP1' prefix, which was initially intended to indicate genome version, was modified to instead reflect the scaffold that contains the gene model. In addition, underscores were replaced with a dot. Thus, the *wnt3* transcript ID HVAEP1_T010730.1 was changed to HVAEP6.T010730.1.

The contig/scaffold naming convention used for the *H. oligactis* genome assembly process uses either the prefix 'contig_' or 'scaffold\_' followed by an arbitrary number. The transcript models follow the standard AUGUSTUS format (e.g., g1842.t1), with the 'g' prefix indicating that the identifier refers to a gene model, a unique non-padded numeric ID for each gene ( '1842'), followed by a transcript isoform ID ('.t1'). 

On the genome portal, the *oligactis* contigs/scaffolds were renamed to all have the prefix 'HOLI'. The numbering was also changed to reflect contig/scaffold size, with the largest contig/scaffold being assigned the ID HOLI00001 (previously contig_18179) and the smallest being assigned the ID HOLI16314 (previously contig_5588). Gene models kept the same AUGUSTUS-formatted ID, but the parent contig/scaffold was prepended to each ID, such that g1842.t1 became HOLI00150.g1842.t1.

All files and code associated with this repository, including the downloadable files hosted on the genome portal (specifically via the 'Scripts and Data' page, available [here](https://research.nhgri.nih.gov/HydraAEP/download/index.cgi?dl=fa)), use the original naming convention, whereas all other parts of the genome portal use the new naming convention. We include tables in the folder 'ID_Conversion' that provide the necessary information for mapping the IDs from the old naming convention to their equivalent ID under the new naming convention.
